Source: US National Archives (Denver), "Montana Primary Sources", Lesson 5: The Sword Bearer Incident of 1887. Public domain. Text layer extracted from https://www.archives.gov/denver/education/materials/lessons-montana.pdf (PDF pages 55-68); facsimile-only pages omitted.

53
Lesson 5: “The raiders defied police and military.”
The Sword Bearer Incident of 1887
Document Citations:
Letter from Crow Agency Agent Henry E. Williamson to the Commissioner of Indian
Affairs dated October 1, 1887; Press Copies of Letters Sent to the Commissioner of Indian
Affairs, 1883-1910; Crow Indian Agency, Montana; Records of the Bureau of Indian Affairs,
Record Group 75; National Archives and Records Administration-Rocky Mountain Region
(Denver).
Minutes from a meeting between the Crow Indians in Council and the Agent held at the
Crow Agency, Montana Territory, December 31, 1887; Press Copies of Letters Sent to the
Commissioner of Indian Affairs, 1883-1910; Crow Indian Agency, Montana; Records of the
Bureau of Indian Affairs, Record Group 75; National Archives and Records Administration-
Rocky Mountain Region (Denver).
Photograph of Crow prisoners taken after the fight of November 5, 1887 (ARC Identifier
533059, Local Identifier 165-AI-18); American Indians, 1881-1885; Records of the War
Department General and Special Staffs, Record Group 165; Still Picture Records, LICON,
Special Media Archives Services Division (NWCS-S); National Archives at College Park,
College Park, MD.
Standards Correlations:
This lesson correlates to the National History Standards:
Era 6: The Development of the Industrial United States (1870-1900)
Standard 4: Federal Indian policy and United States foreign policy after the Civil
War.
Standard 4A: Demonstrate understanding of various perspectives on federal
Indian policy, westward expansion, and the resulting struggles.
This lesson correlates to the Montana Standards for Social Studies:
Content Standard 1—Students access, synthesize, and evaluate information to communicate
and apply social studies knowledge to real world situations.
Benchmarks:
End of Grade 8: 1, 2 and 3
54
End of Grade 12: 1, 2 and 3
Social Studies Content Standard 4: Students demonstrate an understanding of the effects of
time, continuity, and change on historical and future perspectives and relationships.
Benchmarks:
End of Grade 8: 1, 2, 3, 4, 6 and 7
End of Grade 12: 1, 2, 3, 4a, 4b, 6 and 7
Social Studies Content Standard 6: Students demonstrate an understanding of the impact of
human interaction and cultural diversity on societies.
Benchmarks:
End of Grade 8: 4 and 5
End of Grade 12: 4 and 5
About the Documents:
In fall 1887 a group of young Crow Indians led by a Messianic figure, sometimes referred to
as the “Medicine Man,” or “Sword Bearer,” participated in a raid upon the Piegan tribe,
stealing some sixty horses. (Sword Bearer had originally been named Cheez-tah-paezh, or
Wraps-Up-His-Tail.) The government agent at the Crow Agency ordered the young men
arrested for horse stealing. This caused some of the band of horse thieves to start firing their
guns into various buildings at the Agency. Agent H. E. Williamson called for troops to be
sent from nearby Fort Custer. As several companies of cavalry and infantry soldiers under
the command of Colonel Nathan A. M. Dudley arrived, tensions mounted. Finally, the
situation came to head on November 5. After a meeting between General Thomas H. Ruger
and several Crow leaders not involved with Sword Bearer’s group failed to achieve peace, a
fight broke out between Companies E and K of the 1st Cavalry and about 150 Crows. In the
end the Crows retreated, and Sword Bearer was killed. Eventually, eight Crows (considered
to be ringleaders) were taken prisoner and were transferred to Fort Snelling, Minnesota. The
prisoners—Carries His Food, Looks With His Ears, Rock, Bank, He Knows His Coups, Big
Hail, Deaf Bull, and Crazy Head—were held at Fort Snelling until spring 1888, when Bank
and Looks With His Ears were released and sent back to the Crow Agency. All of the
remaining prisoners, except for Deaf Bull, were transferred to the Carlisle Industrial School
in Pennsylvania. Eventually all were allowed to return to the Crow Agency. Deaf Bull was
the last to be released from Fort Snelling in August 1889.
The National Archives and Records Administration-Rocky Mountain Region holds records
relating to many of Montana’s Indian tribes including: the Billings Area Office, the Blackfeet
Indian Agency, the Crow Indian Agency, the Flathead Indian Agency, the Fort Belknap
55
Indian Agency, the Fort Peck Agency, the Fort Shaw Indian School, the Northern Cheyenne
Agency, and the Tongue River Indian Agency.
Suggested Teaching Activities:
• Present the background information about these events to the students. There is a
detailed article in the Autumn 1986 issue of Montana magazine, entitled “Sword
Bearer and the ‘Crow Outbreak,’ 1887” by Colin G. Calloway. You may wish to have
students read the article to obtain a greater understanding of the details.
• Have students read the letter sent by Agent Williamson to the Commissioner of
Indian Affairs (a transcription is provided) and use the Document Analysis
Worksheet. Note: the original letter is a letterpress copy, so the ink is quite feint in
some places.
• Have students read the minutes from the council meeting (a transcription is provided)
and use the Document Analysis Worksheet.
• The Agent seems to change the subject when Plenty Coos (Coups) mentions the Crow
prisoners being held at Fort Snelling. What does he change the subject to? Why do
you think he changes the subject?
• Pass out copies of the photograph of the Crow prisoners and have students use the
Photograph Analysis Worksheet.
• What does the photograph reveal about the age(s) of the prisoners? Do they note
anything unusual about the soldiers’ attire? Hint: they are wearing white gloves.
57
Transcription of Letter from Crow Agency Agent Henry E. Williamson to the
Commissioner of Indian Affairs dated October 1, 1887
Crow Agency Mt. Ty. Oct. 1, 1887
11 A.M.
Atkins, Commissioner.
Washington, D.C.
A party of twenty Crows with captured
horses returned five o’clock yesterday evening
from raid on Piegans. Six of them road [rode] around
Agency firing their guns into buildings in
defiant and threatening manner without
provocation. I called on Genl [General] Dudley
commanding Fort Custer for troops to arrest
them. Three companies arrived at Ten
O’clock. The raiders defied police and
military. At half past Ten O’clock I asked
Commander, Fort Custer to order arrest of
Indians promptly, as my police were unable
to do so. At half past Nine O’clock this
morning additional companies arrived.
The Officer in command having instructions
to protect Agency and Employees only. Gen’l
Dudley has been prompt in his action and is
telegraphing Department Headquarters for full
instructions. I deem the arrest of these
raiders and other defiant Indians at once as
absolutely necessary and ask that orders be so
issued by the War Department.
Henry Williamson
Agent
62
Transcription of meeting between the Crow Indians in Council and the Agent held at
the Crow Agency, Montana Territory, December 31, 1887
Agent I am now ready
to listen to anything you may have
to say about other matters and that
you may want sent to the Commis-
sioner.
Plenty Coos I have not much to say. Col. [Colonel] Howard
has been with us a long time surveying
our lands. I want you to tell the
Great Father to send him here next
year to finish surveying our land and
to show us what is to be done. We
all like him.
It will be time to commence to
work on our farms pretty soon, and
I want the Great Father to let the
Page 2
eight Crow prisoners now held at
Fort Snelling, come home to us pretty
quick, so that they can help their fam-
ilies work, and can take care of their
cattle. We don’t think that they have
done anything very bad.
Agent I have been told that some of you
desire to adopt Mr. Cummins
63
(R. W. Cummins additional farmer at the
Agency.) and his wife and three
children. Is it so?
Plenty Coos I would like to have Mr. Cummins
stay with us as he has been doing
and I am willing that he and his
family should have all the rights
on the Crow Reserve that a Crow
has. That all the family should
have land as the Crows have it.
Big Shoulder Blade We all like Mr. Cummins as one
of our own people. He is living
with us and his children go to the
same school with the Crow children.
He has three children and if he and
his wife and children want to be as
Crows, I am willing that they all
Page 3
should be as one of us, and that they
should all have the rights in every
way that the Crows have.
You (to Agent Williamson) have
always treated us well. One of
us was a fool (referring to the Medi-
cine Man) but he is gone (dead) now.
Whenever you go away from us
64
we would like to have you give us
Col. Howard for an Agent. We
know him and like him, and if you
leave us, we want you to give him
to us. It will be good for you
to get the eight Crow prisoners back
as soon as you can, so that they
can go to work. This is the
way I feel.
Old Crow You ask what we think about Mr.
Cummins and his family. I say
let them all stay with us as Crows
and have all the rights that the
Crows have.
Agent Do you all want Mr. Cummins and
family adopted into your tribe as
Crows and for them to have all
the rights and privileges of the Crows.[?]
Page 4
The Indians all replied that they
did want Mr. Cummins and his
family adopted, and that they should
enjoy all the rights and privileges of
the Crows.
Agent The Agent then asked if any Indian
was opposed to the adoption of Mr.
65
Cummins and his family, and
there was no objection made by
any of the Indians present, their
consent was unanimous.
There were about one hundred of the
leading and representative Indians pre-
sent at this council.
I certify on honor that the above is
a true report of the expressions of
the Crow Indians on the subjects
above mentioned, as interpreted to
me at the council held at Crow
Agency Mont. [Montana] Ty. [Territory], this 31st day of
December 1887.
C. M. Barstow
Issue Clerk
I certify on honor that I was present
and interpreted at the Council with Crow[.]
66
Crow prisoners taken after the fight of Nov.5, 1887 at the Crow Agency [Montana, 1.Crazy
Head, 2.Knowing his Coos, 3.Deaf Bull, 4.The Bank, 5.Looks with his Ears, 6.Big Hail,
7.Carries his Food, and 8.The Rock